Title: Specification for a Floating Point Test Project (for AI)

Introduction

The task is to create both C code for a Raspberry Pi Zero and Verlog
for the FPGA on a Tang Nano 20K board.  The goal is to test and
demonstrate Gowin soft IP blocks for 32-bit floating point operations.

Environments:

The raspberry pi program shall be written in C and built by "make".
The RPI runs Raspian 11.  The program must be called "fp" and be
placed in a directory called "c_code".  You will not have direct
access to the rpi.  I will build and test using C files and a makefile
that you create.

The verilog will be build using the Gowin IDE on Windows.  You will
not have direct access to this.  I will create the project, build, and
test using verilog files that you create and place in a directory
called "src".  I will set the IDE to assume "system verilog 2017".

Scope of Gowin IP blocks to include in the project:

Directory "user_guides" contains PDF files of user guides for each
soft IP block we will use.  These include:

   - FP Add Sub (use a single instance for both addition and subtraction, controlled by an op signal.)
   - FP Mult
   - FP Div
   - FP Comp (compare)
   - FP Sqrt

The Raspberry Pi Program fp:

This program will be interactive and must implement a simple command
parser that provides the following commands:

  - add arg1 arg2

    Use the FPGA to add arg1 to arg2 and print the result from the FPGA

  - sub arg1 arg2

    Use the FPGA to subtract arg2 from arg1 and print the result from the FPGA

  - mult arg1 arg2

    Use the FPGA to mulitply arg1 and arg2 and print the result from the FPGA

  - div arg1 arg2

    Use the FPGA to divide arg1 by arg2 and print the result from the
    FPGA.  Do not allow arg2 to be zero.

  - sqrt arg1

    Use the FPGA to compute the sqrt of arg1 and print the result from
    the FPGA.  Do not allow arg1 to be negative.

  - comp arg1 arg2

   Use the FPGA to compare arg1 and arg2.  Print the result from the FPGA as
   "equal", "greater than", or "less than".

arg1 and arg2 are standard C 32-bit floats on the RPI.  They are compatible
with the FP soft IP on the Gowin FPGA.

Communication between the RPI and the FPGA:

I want to use SPI with the following standard signals:

  - MOSI
  - MISO
  - SCLK (SPI clock from RPI, max 1 - 2 MHz)
  - CS (active-low Chip Select from RPI)

SPI Mode: Mode 0 (CPOL=0, CPHA=0).
Data Endianness: Little-Endian (Least Significant Byte first over SPI).

SPI Transaction Format:
Transactions consist of 5 bytes:
  - Byte 0 (Command): Bit 7 = Write(1) / Read(0). Bits 6:0 = Register Address in words (0, 1, 2, or 3).
  - Bytes 1-4 (Data): 32 bits of little-endian data. For reads, the RPI sends dummy bytes while receiving the result.

The FPGA must implement 4 32-bit registers that the RPI will read and write:

  Word Address 0 (Offset 0x0): Control
  Word Address 1 (Offset 0x4): Arg1
  Word Address 2 (Offset 0x8): Arg2
  Word Address 3 (Offset 0xc): Result

  Control register fields
    bit 31: reset   (when written reset the FPGA)
    bit 30: ready   (FPGA is ready for access after a reset or operation)
    bits 3:0: operation with these encodings
       0000: nop (do nothing, writing 0 can be ignored)
       0001: add
       0002: sub
       0003: mult
       0004: div
       0005: sqrt
       0006: comp
       others-- act as nop.

     Writing a non-zero operation field has the side-effect of starting the
     desired operation. To reset the FPGA without starting an operation, write 0x80000000 (operation = nop).
     When the operation is complete ready will be high.

  Result register for `comp` operation:
     0 = Equal
     1 = Greater Than
     2 = Less Than

You must write a document that summarizes this programming model and
how to use it.

Implementation on RPI:

The RPI C program will use the standard Linux `spidev` user-space API.
Input validation (checking for division by zero or sqrt of negative numbers) must be performed by the C program before issuing SPI commands to the FPGA.

Robustness Requirement:
The `fp` program must check SPI responses and handle unexpected or garbage data gracefully so that it does not crash if it receives invalid bits. This ensures the program can still run and initiate SPI transactions (for observation with a logic analyzer) even if the FPGA design is incomplete or malfunctioning.

Implementation on FPGA:

A test bench must be provided for the FPGA Verilog code, and it must be able to be compiled and run using `iverilog`. Mock modules for the Gowin IPs should be included in the test bench to allow simulation.

Gowin Soft IP blocks use a fixed delay. Assume it is 4 clock cycles, but this should be configured as a parameter (e.g., localparam).

Top level module signals:

   - sysclk (27 MHz clock generated on FPGA board).
   - btn1 (use as a reset for the FPGA). The button is high when pressed. We want to use active low resets internally, so it must be inverted.
   - MOSI
   - MISO
   - SCLK (SPI clock from RPI)
   - CS (chip select from RPI)

All signals will be 3.3V logic.

Notice that the FPGA will be run from the 27 MHz sysclk.  This means
that the SPI siganls are sampled asynchronously and thus must be
synchronized.  The verilog must detect rising edges of SCLK and (if
needed) CS.  SCLK edges can be ignored is CS is not asserted.

